The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Waterloo Roll Call



Time does not diminish the interest of Waterloo, for that combat of
giants is indissolubly connected with Napoleon—the greatest master of
the art of war the world has ever known.

Since the publication of my ROLL CALL in 1890, I have received much
additional information from the relatives of Waterloo officers. This has
enabled me to bring out the present revised and enlarged edition. And I
wish particularly to mention that many of the obituary notices of
Waterloo officers given in the following pages were collected by the
late Mr. J.W. O’Brien, of the British Museum Library (formerly in the
ranks of the 4th Dragoon Guards), whose annotated copy of the ROLL CALL
came into my possession by purchase. Mr. O’Brien’s researches were not
made at my instigation or wish, but having been made, and brought to my
notice, I thought it advisable to secure and utilise this copy of my
book containing the aforesaid MS. entries.

A special feature of the Second Edition is the list of non-commissioned
officers and men (given in Part III.) who served at Waterloo, and
subsequently received commissions in the British army.

                                                         CHARLES DALTON.
                                                         
INTRODUCTION TO FIRST EDITION.

            _Ah! Je les tiens donc, ces Anglais!_—NAPOLEON.


Never since the days of Oliver Cromwell had any name caused so much fear
in England as did that of Napoleon Bonaparte. From 1802 until his first
downfall, in 1814, a spirit of alarm and uneasiness pervaded all classes
in Great Britain, from the King and his Ministers down to the most
illiterate peasant. Those who were witnesses of, and participators in,
this panic have now passed away, but the national pride which our
victory over Napoleon at Waterloo excited in every Briton’s breast is as
strong as ever, and will last till the crack of doom.

In July, 1803, a little pamphlet, entitled _Important Considerations for
the People of this Kingdom_, was published in London, and “sent to the
officiating minister of every parish in England.” This pamphlet, which
bears the Royal Arms of England, was an appeal from the Government to
the Nation, and a diatribe against Napoleon. Mark the closing lines of
this appeal: “Shall we, who are abundantly supplied with iron and steel,
powder and lead—shall we, who have a fleet superior to the maritime
force of all the world, and who are able to bring two millions of
fighting men into the field—shall we yield up this dear and happy land,
together with all the liberties and honours, to preserve which our
fathers so often dyed the land and the sea with their blood?... No, we
are not so miserably fallen; we cannot, in so short a space of time,
have become so detestably degenerate; we have the strength and the will
to repel the hostility, to chastise the insolence of the foe. Mighty,
indeed, must be our efforts, but mighty also is the need.” The idea of a
French invasion was slow in forcing its way into the minds of the
uneducated classes in England. When they first heard of such a
possibility they thought it of no more consequence than the invasion of
Scotland by Charles Edward Stuart with a mere handful of Frenchmen at
his back. They also thought less of the projected descent from having
heard so much in 1797, and during the Rebellion in Ireland in 1798, of a
French army coming to the relief of the National party in that kingdom:—

                    “For the French are on the sea,
                      Says the Shan Van Vaugh,
                    And Ireland will soon be free,
                      Says the Shan Van Vaugh.”

And yet nothing had come of all this talk! But when the nation at large
had fully grasped the possibility of a Napoleonic invasion, Pitt had no
difficulty in raising the sinews of war. No fewer than 300,000 men
enrolled themselves in volunteer corps and defence associations. The
army and navy were increased, and everything was done that was possible
to counteract the power of that wonderful man, who, in the short space
of a few years, had, speaking metaphorically, built a Great Wall of
China round the British Isles, shutting the English out of the commerce
of Europe. Our preparations were none too soon. In 1805 the battle of
Austerlitz established the supremacy of Napoleon over Austria and
Russia. Fortunately for England, Nelson’s crowning victory at Trafalgar
indefinitely postponed Napoleon’s invasion scheme; but we were still
engaged in a gigantic war, single-handed, with half of Europe our
declared, and the other half our enforced, enemies. Nelson was dead;
Pitt was dying from the weight of anxieties which pressed upon him in
this tremendous crisis; Hanover had been taken from us. The outlook was
very gloomy, and affairs became more complicated in 1807, when the
military expeditions, arranged by Lord Grenville’s ministry, against
Constantinople and Egypt, had turned out failures, and resulted in the
Turks declaring war against us and confiscating all British property.
And yet in 1807 Napoleon had not yet reached the zenith of his power.
For the next five years he held the destinies of nearly the whole of
Europe in his own hands. Monarchies of long standing were disestablished
and new kingdoms—Napoleonic kingdoms—were raised up in their place.
Immense French armies traversed Europe from Portugal to the heart of
Russia, and every capital within that limit was, in its turn, subjugated
to the French yoke. But in 1808 two British Generals stemmed the tide of
French conquest in the Peninsula, viz., Sir John Moore and Sir Arthur
Wellesley. The first met a soldier’s death at Corunna, and the latter
was superseded by an incapable commander. But the British Government
soon found that they had made a grievous mistake, and Wellesley was
again entrusted with the supreme command in Portugal. Then commenced
that series of brilliant campaigns which liberated Portugal and Spain
from the Napoleonic grasp, and only ceased after the battle of Toulouse
by Napoleon’s abdication at Fontainebleau. In the spring of 1814 England
had a large army, composed for the most part of seasoned veterans, who
were fit for anything and worth millions. When war broke out again, in
the spring of 1815, at least half of the Peninsular army had been
disbanded—dispersed—and not to be had at any price. Some of the best of
the old Peninsular regiments had been sent to America in 1814, and
several of them—the gallant 43rd Light Infantry being one—did not reach
Waterloo in time to take part in the battle. Raw levies took their
place, and foreign auxiliaries helped to bring up Wellington’s army in
Flanders to the required strength. Of Wellington’s 106,000 barely
one-third were British. The remainder consisted of “King’s German
Legion,” “Hanoverian Levies,” “Brunswick Contingent,” “Nassau
Contingent,” “Dutch and Belgian Troops,” and “Nassauers in Dutch
service.” Of this polyglot force the German Legion, both cavalry and
infantry, were deserving of the highest praise for their conduct on
Waterloo Day. They formed part of the British army for nearly a dozen
years, and many British officers held commissions in the “Legion.” I
have been obliged to leave out the German Legion officers in the
following ROLL CALL (excepting those who served on the Staff), and it
would be invidious, when all did so well, to pick out the British
officers who served in the “Legion” at Waterloo and record their
services when those of their German brother-officers are omitted. I
cannot even make an exception of Colonel (afterwards Baron) Hugh
Halkett, who, like a knight in the olden days of chivalry, singled out a
French general (Cambronne) in single combat, and took him prisoner.

The Hanoverian levies did well also, excepting one regiment, which
refused to charge the French when commanded so to do. And this was
doubtless owing to the _lâcheté_ of their colonel, who, when ordered to
lead his regiment to the charge, declined to do so, saying he had no
confidence in his men. It is related that Captain Horace Seymour, who
had brought this officer Lord Uxbridge’s orders, addressed “a few words
of plain Saxon” to him, “which no gentleman ought to have listened to
unmoved,” but the only effect they had on the Hanoverian was to hasten
his departure to the rear. The Brunswick Contingent fought at a
disadvantage at Waterloo, having lost their brave leader (the Duke of
Brunswick) at Quatre Bras. Of the Nassau, Dutch, and Belgian troops it
is only fair to say that they were, mostly, utterly useless at Waterloo.
The glamour of Napoleon was upon them. They had lately been in his
service, and had a settled conviction that Wellington would be defeated
and his army cut to pieces. “Come over to us, brave Belgians!” shouted a
French regiment at Waterloo to their Belgian opponents in the battle.
But the “brave Belgians” preferred making “a retrograde movement for
strategical reasons,” and retired from the field, carrying news of
Wellington’s defeat to Brussels.

Now for Napoleon’s army: This consisted on the 15th of June of about
128,000 men[A]—mostly veterans who had served in many campaigns, and to
whom defeat was rare. Add to this, that they all belonged to one nation,
and were all equally devoted to their beloved emperor. “No army,” says
Colonel Chesney, in his _Waterloo Lecture_, “was probably ever so well
furnished with leaders as his, as none had ever the like experience
wherewith to train them.” It is no slight to Wellington to say that
Napoleon was, for rapid and offensive warfare, by far the first general
of his day. In defensive warfare Wellington was much in advance of his
great rival. Taking the words out of Philip the Second’s mouth,
Wellington might have with truth said, “Time and I against any other
two.” Once more: Wellington himself told Earl Stanhope that he
considered the presence of Napoleon with the French army at Waterloo
fully equivalent to an additional force of 30,000 men! Now this was the
total of the force sent under Marshal Grouchy, on the 17th June, to
follow the Prussian army, which had been defeated at Ligny by Napoleon
on the previous day, and which was supposed to be in full retreat on
Namur and Liége, so that, in round numbers, Napoleon was himself
considered equal to a whole army corps! If the British had a Picton, the
French had a Ney, who was considered almost Napoleon’s equal in handling
troops in the field, and who had pressed us so sorely at Quatre Bras, on
the 16th of June, when only half our army had arrived at that position.
Then as a leader of cavalry Lord Uxbridge was well matched by
Kellermann, whose fame as a cavalry general dated from Marengo. And
General Mouton (Count Lobau) was an infantry leader of whom any army
might have been proud. It was he who, at the head of the Imperial Foot
Guards, had wrested the victory from the Prussians on the bloody field
of Lützen, in 1813, and saved the French army from a reverse. Enough has
now been said to show what a splendid army the British had opposed to
them on the 18th of June, 1815. “I have them at last, these English!”
exclaimed Napoleon, in a transport of joy, early in the morning of that
day, when he saw our army drawn up in position, with their backs to the
forest of Soignies. But he underrated Wellington’s generalship, nor
could he foresee how the British generals, officers, and men of all
ranks would fight that memorable day, when the eyes of all Europe were
upon them, because upon the issue of that contest depended the fate of
empires and kingdoms, as well as the future peace of the world. And
knowing, as we all do, what glory the victory at Waterloo brought to our
countrymen and our country, we must be generous enough to give the brave
Prussians the full share due to them for their co-operation on that day.
Had it not been for them, Waterloo would have been as barren a victory
as Borodino, and Napoleon would have retreated in as good order,
probably, as Blucher was able to do after his defeat at Ligny. As it
was, our troops bore the whole brunt of the battle without losing an
inch of ground, and the arrival of the Prussians, at the close of the
day, sealed the fate of Napoleon.[B]

Footnote A:

  Lord Wolseley, in his _Decline and Fall of Napoleon_, says the French
  army consisted of about 123,000 men of all arms and 344 guns.—ED.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In offering this, the first annotated Waterloo Army List, to the British
public, I must ask their indulgence for any omissions and errors it may
contain. Although I have spared no trouble in the matter, there must be,
I well know, a few names of British Waterloo officers who have escaped
my notice. But when the following list is compared with the very
defective lists given by Siborne and George Jones (the foundation of all
other lists), I think the following ROLL CALL will be found infinitely
more trustworthy. I have also added the regimental and army commissions
of the Waterloo officers up to the date of the battle, and the honours
and promotions bestowed after Waterloo. The war services of _many_ of
these same officers now appear in print for the first time, and are not
to be found in the _Military Calendar_ of field officers which was
published in 1820, nor in Hart’s _Army Lists_, which date from 1840, and
are such valuable works of reference. Of course, a large proportion of
the names I have annotated, genealogically, are names of well-known
families of the present time, but there are also many names in the
following ROLL CALL which belong to families that are now extinct or
lost sight of. I have endeavoured to rescue as many names from oblivion
as time would allow, but there are a certain number of whom I can give
no information beyond their obituary notices:

             “Here lies Pat Steele. That’s very true.
             Who was he? What was he? What’s that to you?”

As regards the orthography of the names in the regimental lists, I am
not responsible, as they are copied from the “official” _Army List_. The
same rule applies to the precedence of the different regiments.

I am indebted to Colonel F.A. Whinyates, late R.H.A., for some
interesting information regarding artillery officers, and to George
Tancred, Esq., late captain Scots Greys, for the Waterloo muster-roll
and some memoranda relating to the Scots Greys.

                                                       CHARLES DALTON.

32 WEST CROMWELL ROAD, LONDON, S.W.

            _June 1, 1890._

Footnote B:

  “I should not do justice to my feelings, or to Marshal Blücher and
  the Prussian Army, if I did not attribute the success of this
  arduous day to the cordial and timely assistance I received from
  them.”—_Wellington’s despatch to Earl Bathurst._
